Editorial review of observability page (#6519)
Particular/docs.particular.net: architecture/aws/observability.md

---
title: AWS observability services
summary:
reviewed: 2024-03-28

> callsToAction: ['solution-architect', 'poc-help']

Reviewer: As a general rule, Nisha and I were thinking the `solution-architect` call to action makes sense for the technology choices and the `ADSD` one for the concepts

> callsToAction: ['solution-architect', 'poc-help']

Reviewer: As a general rule, Nisha and I were thinking the `solution-architect` call to action makes sense for the technology choices and the `ADSD` one for the concepts

```suggestion
callsToAction: ['solution-architect']
```

Reviewer 2: 🤔  I think it still makes sense to keep the "poc-help" one on technology choices though

---

AWS offers several observability solutions that can be used with the Particular Service Platform. They provide native monitoring, logging, alarming, and dashboards with Amazon CloudWatch, tracing through AWS X-Ray, and other open-source-based managed services. Together, these provide the three pillars of [observability signals](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/).

## Amazon CloudWatch

[Amazon CloudWatch](https://aws.amazon.com/cloudwatch/) is a monitoring and observability service that allows one to collect and access performance and operational data in the form of logs and metrics on a single platform.

:heavy_plus_sign: Pros:

- Single tool to visualize metrics and logs emitted by the system
- Fully managed service
- Tightly integrated with other AWS services

> - Supports querying data from multiple sources, allowing you to monitor metrics from AWS, on-premises, or other cloud providers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Supports querying data from multiple sources to monitor metrics from AWS, on-premises, or other cloud providers
```

callsToAction: ['solution-architect', 'poc-help']
---

> AWS offers several observability solutions which can be used with the Particular Service Platform. They provide native monitoring, logging, alarming, and dashboards with Amazon CloudWatch, tracing through AWS X-Ray, as well as other open-source based managed services. Together these provide the three pillars of [observability signals](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
AWS offers several observability solutions that can be used with the Particular Service Platform. They provide native monitoring, logging, alarming, and dashboards with Amazon CloudWatch, tracing through AWS X-Ray, and other open-source-based managed services. Together, these provide the three pillars of [observability signals](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/).
```

## Amazon CloudWatch

[Amazon CloudWatch](https://aws.amazon.com/cloudwatch/) is a monitoring and observability service that allows one to collect and access performance and operational data in the form of logs and metrics on a single platform.

:heavy_plus_sign: Pros:

- Single tool to visualize metrics and logs emitted by the system
- Fully managed service
- Tightly integrated with other AWS services

> - Supports querying data from multiple sources

Author: Nothing left on the branch. We explicitly took the sources out as it would be the only run on sentence left

- Customizable dashboards with automated alarms and actions
- Real-time telemetry

:heavy_minus_sign: Cons:

- Does not support traces
- [Costs](https://aws.amazon.com/cloudwatch/pricing/) can escalate with increased usage

The Particular Service Platform collects metrics in two forms:

> 1. OpenTelemetry-based metrics - can be collected by [enabling OpenTelemetry](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/operations/opentelemetry) and exporting the metrics to Amazon CloudWatch.

Author: ```suggestion
1. OpenTelemetry-based metrics - can be collected by [enabling OpenTelemetry](/nservicebus/operations/opentelemetry) and exporting the metrics to Amazon CloudWatch.
```

1. Custom metrics with `NServiceBus.Metrics` - can be exported to Amazon CloudWatch - TODO: Link this to TODO2 below.

Try the Amazon CloudWatch sample for OpenTelemetry → TODO: Link this to TODO1 below.

**TODO**:

1. Create a sample that uses Otel and integrates with CloudWatch
1. Create a sample that uses NSB metrics, which integrates with CloudWatch
    1. Collect NSB metrics, send to cloudwatch
    2. Collect [NLog logs with extensions.logging](/samples/logging/extensions-logging/), [send to Cloudwatch](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/prescriptive-guidance/latest/patterns/configure-logging-for-net-applications-in-amazon-cloudwatch-logs-by-using-nlog.html)

## Amazon X-Ray

> [Amazon X-Ray](https://aws.amazon.com/xray/) is a service that can receive trace data from applications. The trace data can provide insights that can help identify performance bottlenecks, edge case errors, and other hard to detect issues.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Amazon X-Ray](https://aws.amazon.com/xray/) is a service that can receive trace data from applications. The trace data can provide insights to help identify the root cause of failures, hard-to-detect issues or side effects, and performance bottlenecks.
```

I think changing the order is important because it's primarily built to help do root-cause analysis of failures or weird side effects and, secondarily, performance bottlenecks.
If you look at the use cases on the [xray page](https://aws.amazon.com/xray/), analyze and debug are first, performance analytics later.

#### Amazon X-Ray
## Amazon X-Ray

[Amazon X-Ray](https://aws.amazon.com/xray/) is a service that can collect trace data from the applications, providing insights that can help identify issues or bottlenecks that could benefit from optimization.
[Amazon X-Ray](https://aws.amazon.com/xray/) is a service that can receive trace data from applications. The trace data can provide insights that can help identify performance bottlenecks, edge case errors, and other hard to detect issues.

:heavy_plus_sign: Pros:

- A single tool to visualize application-level traces and infrastructure-level traces
- AWS X-Ray creates a service map using trace data
- Integrates with other AWS services, such as AWS Lambda, Amazon EC2, Amazon ECS and AWS Elastic Beanstalk
- Single tool to visualize application-level and infrastructure-level traces
- Creates a service map using trace data
- Tightly integrated with other AWS services
- Fully managed service

:heavy_minus_sign: Cons:

- AWS X-Ray offers a [free tier](https://aws.amazon.com/xray/pricing/), but costs may escalate with increases usage, requiring dedicated monitoring
- Pricing is based on the amount and the type of telemetry collected

> - AWS X-Ray is designed to work within the AWS ecosystem

Reviewer 3: I think they are different things.
1) It's great that this works well with other AWS services, if this would not have been true, then it would be listed as a con
2) There may be challenges when using this with tools outside the Amazon stack, because it was primarily built to be used with other AWS services. This is, for me, a con because the opposite pro would have been, "This integrates well with non-AWS services." 

Therefore, "integrate with AWS services" and "integrate with non-aws services" are just 2 different "attributes" that are weighed separately.
Does that make sense?

> - AWS X-Ray is designed to work within the AWS ecosystem

Author: While it makes sense in general, I think it makes less sense for the target audience for this section of our docs.

I posit that the audience of the "AWS Architecture" section on our docs are people looking for guidance on how to build a system using the AWS ecosystem, whereas people that want to mix-and-match ecosystems are more likely to be in one of the specific technology pages rather than the architecture section.

> - AWS X-Ray is designed to work within the AWS ecosystem

Reviewer 3: Ok, that's fair, resolving then

> - [OpenTelemetry](/architecture/observability.md) compatibility is not guaranteed due to `traceId` format differences from the [W3C specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#trace-id)

Reviewer 3: PS: I have an action item to validate whether this is still accurate

Author: ```suggestion
- **TODO** Validate that this is still accurate [OpenTelemetry](/architecture/observability.md) compatibility is not guaranteed due to `traceId` format differences from the [W3C specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#trace-id)
```

> - **TODO** Validate that this is still accurate [OpenTelemetry](/architecture/observability.md) compatibility is not guaranteed due to `traceId` format differences from the [W3C specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#trace-id)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
